# Stat-451-VB
### Carson Lindholm, Adriana Vassek, Nic Schmitt

QUESTION:
How does UW volleyball compare between this year and last year?
- Looking at key stats for UW, how do hitting efficiency, passing effiency, and ace percentage compare from 2023 to 2024?
- Win/loss percentage from current point in season 2023 to 2024
- Comparing numbers for returners between 2023 and 2024

Our final project goal is to analyze statistics for the University of Washington Volleyball team. 
Our overall question is how does UW volleyball compare between the 2023 season and the 2024 season? 
To answer this question, we intend to use data directly from the UW volleyball staff that is coded live during matches and then cleaned afterwards. The data encapsulates every touch the players make during a match, as well as data on opponents.  
There are many statistics that can be tracked in the sport of volleyball, and we intend to look at key factors for comparison. 
The first question we will explore is looking at key statistics for UW, such as hitting percentage (number of kills - number of errors / total attack attempts), passing percentage (amount of good and medium receptions / total number of receptions), and ace percentage (total number of aces / total serves). These statistics are big numbers in volleyball and can tell us a lot about how the team is performing. 
We will also look at win/loss percentages and compare where the huskies were at last year at this same point in the season. 
We will finally look at returners and how their numbers compare from last year to this year. 
These three questions will help us have an in depth look at the players and the team, comparing the difference between this year and last year. 

How do hitting efficiency, passing efficiency, and ace percentage compare from 2023 to 2024? (graph: uwvbstats.png)
- From the bar graphs presented, we can see the average for the team hitting percentage, the passing rate, and ace percentage. We can see from the first graph that the hitting percentage is higher for the 2024 season than the 2023 season. Hitting efficiency is measured by (kills - errors) / total attacks. This means that overall, the team is scoring at a higher rate on attacking in 2024. Passing efficiency also sees and increase, but it is comparable to the 2023 season. Passing is rated on a 0-3 pt scale, of Ace, Bad, Medium, Good, respectively. This is all evaulated based on how a player receives a serve. Based on the plot, the team is passing similarly to how they performed in 2023. On average, they are passing at a 2.18 in 2024, which means they are passing slightly above medium on average, which compares similarly to their 2.14 average in 2023. Ace Percentage is also similar betweem 2023 and 2024. The team aced at 1% higher (8%) in 2023 compared to 7% in 2024. This means that the team is scoring similarly on their serves from 2023 to 2024. Overall, the team is performing better in their hitting in 2024, but otherwise similarly in passing and aces between 2023 and 2024.

How does the win rate compare between the current (2024) and last year's (2023) season? (graph: Wins through Season.png)
- Preliminary graph comparing the wins over time for both seasons shows a clear improvement overall. While the season is not over yet, the team has surpassed last years total wins, and has far fewer losing streaks. There is some similarity in progression later in both seasons, but the graph shows a clear stronger starting half for the 2024 season, with a 13 win streak, compared to a much more staggered season in 2023. A comparison that could be made is that once the 2024 season records its first loss, the graph becomes much more similar to that of 2023, being long/medium loss streaks with a few wins to stagger them. However without plotting much more data over time, there's no solid claim to make at this moment.

How does UW Women's volleyball perform against attack types by opposing teams? Which play types are they weak against, and how efficient are the opposing team plays? (opposing_attacks.png)
From the graph, we can see that the UW women's team is weak against "quicks," which is an attack where the ball is quickly passed to the setter, who then sets the ball quickly and low along the net, which the hitter quickly spikes. These attacks use fast-paced play styles while the opposing team's defense is unprepared. These attacks have above a 50% kill rate and a similarly high-efficiency rate. Similar to a quick, UW seems to be weak against "reds," which is a playstyle similar to a quick but with a change in tempo at the set or spike, usually to get the opposing team's blockers to jump and block before the hit. Both of these play styles are usually set to your right-side hitter. The Graphic also shows that UW volleyball is strong against "maks" and "huts." These slower plays off the setter typically go to your left-side hitter. This means that the ball is in the air longer after the set. This gives the opposing team's defense more time to set up and prepare blocks. While these plays are moderate in kill rate (22% for huts and 25% for maks), they have low efficiency. This means that these plays tend to have higher errors occurring for the attacking team, whether misplaced sets, off-tempo hits, or another misstep. In general, we see that faster plays tend to have a higher kill percentage, while slower plays tend towards lower kill percentages and lower efficiency. 
